“It isn’t normal to know what we want. It is a rare and difficult psychological achievement.”
~ Abraham Maslow

“I take my fundamental cue from John Coltrane that says there must be a priority of integrity, honesty, decency, and mastery of craft.”
~ Cornel West

“The two most important days in your life are the day you are born... and the day you find out why.”
~ Mark Twain

“Death is not the greatest loss in life. The greatest loss is what dies inside us while we live.”
~ Norman Cousins

“Liberty means responsibility. That is why most people dread it.”
~ George Bernard Shaw

“If you want to do this, if you want to play big, if you want to really impact lives, you’ve got to face yourself. You’ve got to be courageous and willing to go all in and address everything about you that is uncomfortable.”
~ Harry Lopez

“Life’s most persistent and urgent question is, ‘What are you doing for others?’”
~ Martin Luther King, Jr.

“We should care as much about well-doing as well-being. I want to live in a world that values purpose as much as pleasure, contribution as much as contentment, honesty as much as excitement, and justice as much as joy.”
~ Adam Grant

“You cannot do kindness too soon, for you never know how soon it will be too late.”
~ Ralph Waldo Emerson

“I’m here to contribute. We all depend on each other. I depend on people in generations prior to me. People in generations after me will depend on me.”
~ Bryan Nwafor

“Meaning is about making a difference, not having an audience.”
~ Adam Grant

“I don’t see why we have to say ‘I will die,’ because I can already see myself in you, in other people, and in future generations.”
~ Thich Nhat Hanh

“This is my simple religion. There is no need for temples; no need for complicated philosophy. Our own brain, our own heart is our temple; the philosophy is kindness.”
~ Dalai Lama

“You don’t have to become something you’re not to be better than you were.”
~ Sidney Poitier

“Knowing others is intelligence; knowing yourself is true wisdom. Mastering others is strength; mastering yourself is true power.”
~ Laozi

“Always be a first version of yourself and not a second rate version of someone else.”
~ Judy Garland

“Too many people spend money they earned to buy things they don’t want to impress people that they don’t like.”
~ Will Rogers

“We’re only envious of those already doing what we were made to do. Envy is a giant, flashing arrow pointing us toward our destiny.”
~ Glennon Doyle Melton

“The idea says get in the car. Don’t worry, I’m driving. Sometimes I’m shotgun, sometimes I’m in the trunk. The idea takes you where it wants to go.”
~ Dave Chapelle

“I increasingly encounter a strain of critique … arguing that we strive toward arbitrary fitness goals, or feel compelled to carefully document a dinner on Instagram, or race to finish reading the latest hot novel, because we’ve internalized a culture of production designed to ultimately help the capitalists exploit our labor.”
~ Cal Newport

“And I feel like that [idea of] like hard work, if you’re not suffering and eating sh*t and you’re not happy, then you’re not doing anything good for society. I feel like that is the biggest load of bullsh*t. It’s the biggest lie that young people get fed.”
~ Joey Santore

“Everything in nature invites us constantly to be what we are.”
~ Gretel Ehrlich

“The place to find who you are is where you stand.”
~ George Mumford

“Remember that wherever your heart is, there you will find your treasure.”
~ Paulo Coelho